(® Check for updates

EE
GU MUR
Original Article re SOGIEMY

Media, Culture & Society
2019, Vol. 41(2) 196-218

The political economy of © The Author(s) 2018
Facebook's platformization O28

Article reuse guidelines:

i n t h emo bi l e eco syste m: sagepub.com/journals-permissions

DOI: 10.1177/01634437 18818384

Facebook M essenger asa journals.sagepub.com/home/mcs
. 8 @SAGE
platform instance

David B Nieborg®

University of Toronto, Canada

Anne Helmond®

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract

Facebook's usage has reached a point that the platform's infrastructural ambitions
are to be taken very seriously. To understand the company's evolution in the age
of mobile media, we critically engage with the political economy of platformization.
This article puts forward a conceptual framework and methodological apparatus to
study Facebook's economic growth and expanding platform boundaries in the mobile
ecosystem through an analysis of the Facebook Messenger app. Through financial
and institutional analysis, we examine Messenger's business dimension and draw on
platform studies and information systems research to survey its technical dimension.
By retracing how Facebook, through Messenger, operationalizes platform power, this
article attempts to bridge the gap between these various disciplines by demonstrating
how platforms emerge and how their apps may evolve into platforms of their own,
thereby gaining infrastructural properties. It is argued that Messenger functions as a
‘platform instance' that facilitates transactions with a wide range of institutions within
the boundaries of the app and far beyond.

Keywords
Facebook, infrastructure, mobile apps, multi sided markets, platform, platform
instance, political economy

Corresponding author:
Anne Helmond, University of Amsterdam, 1012 XT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Email: a.helmond@uva.nl
Nieborg and Helmond 197

Introduction

Advertising-driven platforms such as Google and Facebook are offered as prime exam-
ples of businesses that have shown an unprecedented ability to grow their user and part-
ner base and to expand into markets far and wide. Critical media theorists (Srmicek,
2016), mainstream economists (Haucap and Heimeshoff, 2014), and software and plat-
form studies scholars (Bechmann, 2013) point toward the inherent inequalities that con-
stitute the political economy of digital platforms. We contribute to these critiques by
offering an analytical framework to examine the evolution, that is, the economic growth
and technological expansion, of digital platforms.

In this article, we will focus on Facebook, which next to sporting 2.13 billion monthly
active users (FBE2018) is in the global top 10 in terms of market capitalization.! One of
Facebook's economic growth drivers has been the rapid diffusion of mobile media
(Goggin, 2014). Since 2013, Facebook's suite of mobile apps — chief among which are
Facebook, Messenger, WhatsApp, and Instagram — occupied the global top 5 of most
downloaded apps in the iOS (Apple) and Play (Google) app stores (APP2014; APP2015;
APP2016; APP2017; APP2018a). In a matter of years, mobile advertising has become
Facebook's primary revenue driver, representing 88% of its total advertising revenue
(US$39,942 million), which in itself constitutes 98% of its total revenue in 2017
(FBE2018).

While Facebook's relentless growth reflects the company's ability to rapidly trans-
form in light of emerging technologies, competing platforms, and changing user prac-
tices, we will argue that these growth figures mask how Facebook contributes to the
‘platformization of infrastructure' and the ‘infrastructuralization of platforms' (Plantin
et al., 2018). That is, how Facebook extends its boundaries — for example, via plug-ins or
integrating services, a process theorized as ‘platformization' (Helmond, 2015) — into the
mobile app ecosystem. Historically, the process of platformization primarily concerned
platforms extending into the web and pulling web data back into the platform. In this
article, we build on this theory by asking how this process unfolds in the mobile ecosys-
tem, through an analysis of the Facebook Messenger app (hereafter: Messenger).

Our analytical framework breaks down into two parts. On one hand, there is
Facebook's role, position, and transformation as a public company, or the business
dimension of its platform. Drawing on multisided market theory (Gawer, 2014; Rochet
and Tirole, 2003), we account for the platform's economic growth by surveying which
institutions Messenger partners with. On the other hand, we consider Facebook's tech-
nical platform dimension as a programmable computing system (Bogost and Montfort,
2009: 2). This means that we examine how the company expands itself infrastructurally,
through Messenger, into the app ecosystem by offering a set of application program-
ming interfaces (APIs), software development kits (SDKs), and plugins, which facili-
tate Messenger's, and therefore the platform's, programmability. Through financial and
institutional analysis, we examine Messenger's business dimension and we draw on
platform studies and information systems research to study its technical dimension.
With 1.3 billion daily active users, who have over 7 billion conversations per day
(FBM2017f), Messenger is of particular interest because it displays Facebook's ambi-
tions to, in the words of Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, position its ‘family of apps'

198 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

as ‘ubiquitous utilities' (FBE2015a; FBE2016a). Infrastructural ambitions such as
these, coupled with the fact that Facebook's messaging apps are in a crucial phase of
development and diffusion, open the door for policy interventions and call for future
research on platform evolution.

Studying Facebook: from social network to data
infrastructure

Before we examine Messenger's position in the wider app ecosystem, let us start with a
deceivingly simple question: What is Facebook? As we aim to expand our inquiry and go
beyond Facebook's main website, we want to challenge the colloquial understanding of
Facebook as a social network site. A clear understanding of Facebook's growth and
boundaries is complicated by the company's — that is, their key executives' — self-
description, ranging from a ‘social directory' to a ‘social utility' to the ‘core social infra-
structure' of the web (Hoffmann et al., 2018: 204-205). Whereas Facebook executives
tend to play up its empowering potential for users as citizens, investors and business
analysts are constantly reminded of the monetary potential of users as consumers and
targets of advertising (Hoffmann et al., 2018). These alternating rhetorical interventions
aim to normalize the company's infrastructural ambitions and prevent a coherent analyti-
cal framework that accounts for the platform's expanding boundaries.

Facebook's prominence coincides with a marked increase in scholarly interest, to the
extent that half of social media scholarship in the social sciences focuses on Facebook
(Stoycheff et al., 2017). This sizeable body of work tends to follow Zuckerberg's empha-
sis on user-to-user interaction and the platform's supposed emancipatory promise: only
3.2% of these studies focus on organizational and corporate issues and relationships
(Stoycheff et al., 2017). What is more problematic is that this body of work understands
Facebook as a singular, user-facing website. For example, in their review of 114
Facebook-related studies, Caers et al. (2013) refer to Facebook as ‘the website Facebook.
com'. Similarly, in their literature review, Wilson et al. (2012) identify 412 articles that
“assess the impact of Facebook on social life', noting how it has changed social interac-
tions among users online and offline, as well as how users interact with organizations
(companies, political organizations, non-governmental organizations) (p. 203). Even
though the authors acknowledge that Facebook is ‘constantly updating the features of the
site', they contend that such ‘changes are largely additive, with drastic changes becom-
ing less common as the site matures' (Wilson et al., 2012: 208). While these review
articles are to some extent sensitive to Facebook's business dimensions, they offer a nar-
row and static understanding of Facebook as a single destination on the web. We will
demonstrate that the changes to Facebook have been quite drastic and can have signifi-
cant political economic effects on citizens, businesses, politicians, and policies.

Put differently, this body of scholarly work only examines the proverbial tip of the
iceberg, that is, the part of Facebook that is most visible part to end-users. What is omitted
are, the much bigger, invisible technical dimensions of the platform, as well as its business
dimension, which together dictate how the platform is transforming over time and how it
interacts with other inhabitants in the wider ecosystem of ‘connective media' (Van Dijck,
2013). However muddled at times, Zuckerberg's relentless proselytizing on the
Nieborg and Helmond 199

company's future direction should be taken seriously and subjected to rigorous critique.
In February 2017, after a wave of criticism on the company's alleged role in spreading
misinformation and influencing the “Brexit' referendum and the US elections, Zuckerberg
posted a 6000-word manifesto outlining Facebook's changing direction from ‘connecting
people' to building ‘social infrastructure' (FB2017a). Implying that the solution to
Facebook is simply more Facebook, this framing positions the platform as a ubiquitous,
foundational, if not essential gateway supporting ‘social' services. In his blistering cri-
tique of the company, Vaidhyanathan (2018) contends that this new vision reflects
Facebook's changing ambition from being the ‘operating system of our laptops and desk-
tops' to becoming ‘the operating system of our lives' (p. 99). Next to investments in
Facebook's family of apps and services, the Internet.org initiative and the acquisition of
Oculus Rift's virtual reality technology are indicative of the company's efforts to build
such a social infrastructure by cultivating new partnerships, markets, and audiences.

Facebook's long-term strategy complicates using the website, the user profile, or the
News Feed as sole units of analysis to understand Facebook's users, usage, and evolu-
tion. To analyze Facebook's evolution, particularly its expansion into the mobile ecosys-
tem, we view it as a data infrastructure hosting a variety of platform instances that
include websites and a ‘family' of over 72 apps.” We introduce the concept of platform
instances to offer a deeper level of granularity in our analysis of Facebook's evolution.

Drawing on infrastructure studies (Bowker and Star, 1999), Gray et al. (2016) define
‘data infrastructure' as ‘socio-technical systems implicated in the creation, processing,
and distribution of data' (p. 234). Correspondingly, Alaimo and Kallinikos (2017) argue
that social media platforms, by encoding social activities into data for further processing,
are performing ‘infrastructural, backstage data work' (p. 175). This data work, that is the
extraction, analysis, and distribution of data, is central to Facebook's advertising-driven
business model (Srnicek, 2016).

While Facebook's data infrastructure operates in the back-end, on the front-end it oper-
ates a variety of distinct user-facing platform instances to distribute and perform these
data work. These platform instances include web instances, such as Facebook.com and
Messenger.com, and dozens of app instances, including the Facebook and Messenger
apps. We consider each platform instance as a technical and economic platform configura-
tion that facilitates connectivity and interactions among end-users and multiple partners.
Put differently, individual platform instances serve as stand-alone derivatives that each
provide a distinct ‘view' of the platform as a whole and offer different functionalities tai-
lored to distinct user groups. Each platform instance contributes to Facebook's overall
data work while simultaneously engaging in its own. The Messenger app, then, is such an
app instance that facilitates mobile messaging among end-users and interactions between
end-users, advertisers, institutions, content developers, and businesses. As we will discuss
more in-depth below, by offering building blocks for third-party development, Messenger
constitutes a multisided market within the iOS or Android ecosystems.

The technical and business dimensions of platforms

Our analytical framework concerns ad-supported social media platforms the likes of
Google, Facebook, and Twitter. When discussing platforms, media and communication
200 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

scholars, ever anxious to be seen flirting with economic or technological determinism,
tend to shy away from either explicitly economic or technical perspectives. Instead, dis-
cussions gravitate toward ‘platform politics' (Gillespie, 2010), examining how platforms
are anything but neutral intermediaries shaping interactions and organizing content.
Others have offered approaches that are more inclusive to both the economic and techni-
cal dimensions of platform analysis (Bucher, 2012; Helmond, 2015; Langlois and Elmer,
2013; Van Dijck, 2013). To a certain extent, the division between Facebook as a business
platform and a technical platform might seem artificial. We want to emphasize that both
dimensions are mutually constituted, or to be considered a ‘double articulation' (Langlois
and Elmer, 2013: 5), as Facebook's economic imperatives are enacted through its soft-
ware. By focusing on specific platform instances and how they evolve individually, our
framework offers an approach for a more fine-grained, historical analysis of platform
evolution.

To get a firmer grip on Facebook's economic and technical dimensions and to criti-
cally evaluate its increasingly dominant position in the digital economy, we draw from
recent work in business studies, critical political economy, platform studies, and infor-
mation systems research. Our contribution attempts to bridge the gap between these vari-
ous disciplines by demonstrating how quickly platforms evolve and how new platform
instances, particularly apps, emerge and transform.

First, these approaches offer us the conceptual tools to critically examine platform
growth, expansion, and ultimately, power. Business and platforms studies and informa-
tion systems research are particularly sensitive to the medium-specificity of platforms as
programmable and extensible technical systems that enact institutional relationships
through software (Bogost and Montfort, 2009; Gawer, 2014; McIntyre and Srinivasan,
2017). Rather than measuring growth in pure financial terms, we widen the economic
lens by pointing toward the development of new services, websites, and apps, which
increasingly have infrastructural properties, and toward the subsequent creation of insti-
tutional partnerships and capturing of markets.

Second, our framework is grounded in critical political economic thought by adopt-
ing a decidedly historical and normative perspective on ‘platform capitalism' (Srnicek,
2016). It has almost become a truism to note that the concentration of Facebook's media
power is unprecedented. Facebook's evolution has been duly noted by critical media
scholars studying platforms (Bodle, 2011; Bucher, 2012), inviting a more historically
informed mode of analysis (Briigger, 2015). Following Vaidhyanathan (2018), we are
similarly troubled by the company's ambition to become the ‘operating system of our
lives'. Our concerns relate to the litany of recent revelations about the company's dubi-
ous role in elections, the spread of misinformation, and the unauthorized sharing of
end-user data (Vaidhyanathan, 2018), as well as to the implications of the platformiza-
tion of cultural production (Nieborg and Poell, 2018). For example, in the field of jour-
nalism, Facebook's ability to set technological and economic standards has created
‘institutional dependencies' by news organizations (Caplan and boyd, 2018). These
challenges signal the emergence of ‘infrastructural capture' instigated by platforms and
signal a further encroachment of journalists' autonomy (Nechustai, 2018). All of these
concerns are only exacerbated by Facebook's complete lack of corporate transparency
and accountability.

Nieborg and Helmond 201

Facebook as a business platform

Nowhere is Facebook's economic dominance more apparent than in the digital market-
ing ecosystem, where the company, together with Google, rakes in the majority of adver-
tising-related revenue in the US market (Mosco, 2017). Oligopoly power, or duopoly
power in the realm of digital advertising, is nothing new to the cultural industries. Next
to mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers, transnational media and communications com-
panies gain market share by setting up corporate partnerships and forging alliances, for
example, through equity swaps, setting industry or technology standards, or through
licensing agreements (Mosco, 2009). Facebook follows this historical trajectory by lev-
eraging its high capital position through constant acquisitions (e.g. Instagram and
WhatsApp), establishing industry and marketing partnerships (Helmond et al., 2017;
Nieborg, 2016), as well as through other common forms of institutional synergy, such as
board interlocks (Van Dijck, 2013: 37).

Typically, critical political economic studies consider a company's horizontal integra-
tion (industry diversification), vertical integration (extending control over the production
and circulation process), and transnationalization (Mosco, 2009). An emerging body of
work by a prolific group of orthodox economists (Rochet and Tirole, 2003) and business
scholars (McIntyre and Srinivasan, 2017) challenges this understanding of industry
organization by arguing that a seemingly diverse group of companies — ranging from
Uber to Airbnb and from Apple to Facebook — all share a similar organizational and busi-
ness logic. That is, these companies give way to multisided markets where platforms
facilitate interactions between distinct ‘sides' or ‘users', which include end-users (i.e.
consumers), businesses (e.g. content developers), advertisers, and others.? For example,
rather than offering a subscription service directly to users, Facebook started as a two-
sided platform offering free access to students while generating revenue via targeted
advertisements (Briigger, 2015).

The proliferation of multisided markets resulted in a broad swath of scholars focusing
on network economics, industrial organization, information systems, technology man-
agement, strategic management, and engineering design (De Reuver et al., 2018;
McIntyre and Srinivasan, 2017). These conceptual and empirical efforts are relevant for
our understanding of Facebook in two ways. First, the political economy of platforms is
one of deep power asymmetries between a platform, and its users and partners (Nieborg
and Poell, 2018). These asymmetries are partly a result of positive same-side or cross-
side network effects, which increase the value of a platform when users join either the
same side or indirectly when users join the cross side. In our analysis of Messenger, we
will illustrate how Facebook leverages network effects to grow its user bases and draw
on the notion of multisidedness to examine how this particular platform instance is posi-
tioned to facilitate connectivity among a wide range of users. Second, the literature on
multisided markets forwards a socio-technological understanding of platforms by con-
sidering the issue of platform governance and design. As aggregators, platforms reshape
the formation of institutional relationships by setting up a standardized, technological
infrastructure for user connectivity and business transactions.

Despite its conceptual and analytical value, multisided market theory has noticeable
gaps, particularly for critical media scholars. First, platforms tend to be considered as
202 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

static objects instead of evolving platforms (Gawer, 2014; Tiwana, 2014). Second, while
platform design is a research focus in the multisided market literature, an understanding
of the implications of the technological expansion of platforms, such as Facebook's
many instances, into other services, remains underdeveloped. That is to say, platform
power is intrinsically disproportionate and the dramatic shift toward app-based user
practices signals a further intensification of the commodification of audiences (Nieborg,
2015, 2016), or in the case of Facebook, of user activity and connectivity (Fisher, 2015).

Facebook as a technical platform

Drawing from business studies, Gawer (2014: 1239) emphasizes the dual nature of plat-
form analysis — the business dimension of platforms, which is rooted in economic theory
—and conceptualizes platforms as multisided markets, and the technological dimension,
which builds on insights gleaned from engineering design and approaches platforms as
technological architectures. The latter approach is similar to recent work in information
systems where ‘digital platforms' are conceptualized as programmable, technical arti-
facts with an extensible codebase (De Reuver et al., 2018). Similarly, under the umbrella
of ‘platform studies', media studies scholars engage with the materiality and technical
specificity of new media's underlying computer systems to examine how the lower ‘plat-
form layer' enables and constrains particular activities and produces social, cultural, and
political effects (Bogost and Montfort, 2009). Referring to the technical dimension of
platforms in the context of computer systems, their emphasis is on ‘computational plat-
forms' or ‘a computing system of any sort upon which further computing development
can be done', again drawing attention to the reprogrammable dimension of computer
systems (Bogost and Montfort, 2009).

Platforms afford programmability by offering a set of APIs that provide third-party
developers access to platform data and functionalities to build new platform integrations
and extensions such as plug-ins and apps (Bodle, 2011; Helmond, 2015). As such, APIs
are not only used to make platform data and functionality accessible outside of its bound-
aries, but they simultaneously decentralize data extraction, as platform extensions collect
data for the platform from external websites and apps (Gerlitz and Helmond, 2013). This
dual logic of platform expansion and decentralized data capture is understood as ‘plat-
formization', which emphasizes not only how a platform's technical design and evolu-
tion are related but also how the infrastructural and economic ambitions of social media
platforms are interconnected (Helmond, 2015). Platformization, then, encompasses a
platform's outwards extension into other websites, platforms, and apps, as well as
inwards extension, with third-party integrations that operate within the boundaries of the
core platform. In our analysis of Messenger, we will draw on this dual understanding to
analyze the app's, and therefore the wider platform's, evolution.

To structure and formalize platform extensions and integrations, platforms such as
Facebook offer numerous APIs, which can be understood as sets of stable and standard-
ized interfaces that are part of a platform's so-called ‘boundary resources', which are
made available to ‘support third-party development in their development work'
(Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2013). Platform boundary resources are important techni-
cal and social resources that coordinate and govern third-party development, as they
Nieborg and Helmond 203

provide the technical building blocks, the codified instructions in the form of developer
documentation, as well as the platform rules governing this development in the form of
terms of services (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2013). Often, these resources are bundled
in SDKs to facilitate third-party development. As we will explicate in our methodology,
boundary resources offer important entry points for understanding a platform's technical
expansion as they enable a platform to implement and extend their data infrastructure into
third-party websites, platforms, and apps, and facilitate inwards integrations.

The process of platformization has profound political economic and infrastructural
implications. First, APIs ensure interoperability — the ability of software to programmati-
cally communicate and exchange data — not only internally among different platform
instances but also externally with competing platforms and third-party web services and
apps (Bodle, 2011; Tiwana, 2014: 98). However, the interoperability offered by APIs
rarely concerns a symmetrical relationship (Caplan and boyd, 2018). Instead, dominant
platforms such as Google and Facebook are able to enforce ‘intraoperability' instead
(Bechmann, 2013). Intraoperability denotes a digital platform becoming such a domi-
nant hub in the data economy that it can enforce asymmetrical power relationships,
‘thereby enhancing the importance of their standards', which in turn entrenches their
position of power even further (Bechmann, 2013: 55). Second, by having third-party
developers accept intraoperability and the subsequent commodification of end-user con-
nectivity and personal data, platforms are able to gain infrastructural properties as they
are becoming perceived as ubiquitous communication utilities (Plantin et al., 2018).

In sum, we point toward a platform's programmability and intraoperability, and the
infrastructural implications of platformization to analyze Messenger's growth and
expansion. Together with an understanding of platforms as multisided markets, this
approach allows us to examine how power is enacted and negotiated among platform
owners, between platform owners and third parties, and how platform owners envision
third-party development on top of their data infrastructure. Before introducing our analy-
sis of Messenger, we survey the methodological challenges associated with analyzing
platforms and apps in motion.

Methodology: studying Facebook's evolution

As an object of study, Facebook comes with a unique set of methodological challenges.
To examine Facebook's evolution as a technical and business platform, we follow two
approaches: ‘boundary analysis' of platform documentation and ‘document analysis' of
financial and managerial data.

The analysis of boundary resources relies on documentation provided by the platform
and includes developer documentation, product documentation, and financial disclo-
sures, which collectively functions as an archive that enables a reconstruction of a plat-
form's evolution (Apperley and Parikka, 2018; Eaton et al., 2015). This material does
come with its own set of issues, as archives from websites, platforms, and apps are often
incomplete and old documentation has been moved, overwritten, or simply deleted
(Briigger, 2015). To locate these missing or removed resources, we turn to the largest
publicly available web archive, the Internet Archive Wayback Machine, which has saved
over hundreds of thousands of snapshots of Facebook's platform documentation since its
204 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

Table |. Overview of data sources.

Platform boundary resource URL Scope
(timeframe: number of pages or
archived pages, analysis interval)

Facebook Developers Docs ttps://web.archive.org/ Technical, historical
(August 2006—March 2018: web/*/https://developers.
15,993 pages, monthly) facebook.com
Facebook Developers Blog ttps://developers.facebook. Technical
(August 2012—March 2018: 409 com/blog/
Pages, monthly)
Facebook Newsroom (April ttps://newsroom.fb.com Business and
2006—March 2018: 730 pages) technical
Facebook Blog (August ttps://web.archive.org/ Business and
2006—August 201 |: 458 pages) web/*/https://blog.facebook.com technical, historical
Facebook Developers Blog ttps://web.archive.org/ Technical, historical
(August 2006—March 2018: 258 web/*/https://developers.
Pages) facebook.com/blog/
Facebook Business (February ttps://web.archive.org/ Business, historical
2008—March 2018: 8281 pages, web/*/https://www.facebook.
monthly com/business/
Messenger (November ttps://web.archive.org/ Business, historical
2014—March 2018: 44,611 pages, web/*/http://www.messenger.
monthly) com
Messenger Platform Developer ttps://developers.facebook. Technical
Docs (April 2016—March 2018) com/docs/messenger-platform
Messenger Platform (March ttps://web.archive.org/ Technical, historical
2015—March 2018: 57 pages) web/*/https://messenger.com/

platform
Messenger Platform Blog ttps://messenger.fb.com/blog Business and
(November 2016—March 2018: technical
61 pages)
Messenger Business (March ttps://web.archive.org/ Business, historical
2015—March 2018: 59 pages) web/*/https://messenger.com/

business
Investor Relations (February ttps://investor.fb.com/ Business

2012—March 2018: 23 transcripts)

launch. More specifically, we analyze the platform's current and archived boundary
resources, as they offer insights into Facebook's infrastructural ambitions (Table 1;
Appendix 1). These technical documents provide detailed information about (1) the
introduction of new platform resources, such as new APIs and SDKs; (2) the data, func-
tionality, and development options they make available; and (3) the instructions for their
technical implementation. Consequently, these resources may offer important insights
into the technological expansion of a platform. All (archived) platform boundary
resources in Table 1 were searched for mentions of [Messenger], [messaging], [mobile],
[API], [SDK], and [plugin] to chronicle the platform's evolution.
Nieborg and Helmond 205

To gain a deeper understanding of Facebook's business strategy as a public company,
we analyzed Facebook quarterly investor calls, the transcripts of which are publicly
available on Facebook's Investor Relation pages (cf. Elmer, 2017; Hoffmann et al.,
2018). We collected 23 transcripts, which were loaded into a textual analysis tool
(NVivo). The corpus totaled over 240,000 words on which we applied a descriptive cod-
ing scheme that included statements on Facebook's long-term strategic business goals,
its mobile platform strategy, third-party partnerships, how to ‘monetize messaging', the
growth and role of mobile advertising, and any statements specific to the Messenger app
and its rollout. Second, we used the same corpus to conduct exploratory financial analy-
sis to be able to substantiate political economic claims about the platform's growth as a
business platform.

Finally, our approach is informed by the work of Bodle (2011), who studied the ongo-
ing development of Facebook's APIs and notes how API analysis is able to identify the
relations between new technical features and a platform's business strategies. To this
end, we matched managerial statements with the insights gleaned from analysis of
Facebook's platform documentation in order to reconstruct the historical trajectory of
Messenger.

The technical and economic expansion of the early
Facebook platform

Before we discuss how the process of platformization unfolds for Messenger, we briefly
retrace Facebook's transformation from an online college directory in 2004 into a popu-
lar, if not dominant ‘family of apps'. There are numerous ways to retell Facebook's his-
tory, either by discussing its discursive positioning (Hoffmann et al., 2018), the social
implications of its technical features over time (Bodle, 2011), its development as a media
text (Briigger, 2015), or by offering a financialized history (Elmer, 2017). Drawing on
these sources and following the boundary and economic analysis outlined above, it
becomes clear that the foundation for Facebook's growth and expansion is rooted in its
formative years. We consider the launch of the ‘Facebook Development Platform' (FDP)
in May 2007 a pivotal point in the company's early history as it jump-started the process
of platformization.* Moreover, FDP's rollout paved the way for Facebook's initial public
offering (IPO), and as we argue in the next section, it offered a blueprint to transform
Facebook into a mobile-first company.

Directly speaking to the platform's technological and economic dimensions, FDP
offered third parties ‘deep integration' to ‘build applications like Facebook does', as well
as a ‘new opportunity' to ‘build a business around your Facebook application' (FBP2007b;
FBP2007c). To this end, developers were provided access to two key assets: Facebook's
“social graph' containing select, personal end-user data, and standardized technology —
the Facebook API, Facebook Query Language, and Facebook Markup — to build applica-
tions on top of Facebook's data infrastructure (FBN2007a; FBP2007a; FBP2007d). FDP
enabled third-party content developers, such as game developers, to build ‘social' appli-
cations on top of the social graph within the boundaries of Facebook.com using so-called
“canvas pages' (FBN2007a).
206 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

The FDP documentation shows how Facebook took steps to open the platform up to
third-party developers to expedite its outwards extension while simultaneously expand-
ing inwards, by offering institutions an opportunity to establish a presence within the
confines of the site. As for the latter strategy, once FDP was technically in place, the
company started further developing its business dimension by formalizing its relations
with partners, such as advertisers and businesses, by explicitly addressing them in key
boundary resources. For example, the ‘Facebook Ads' system was introduced in 2007 to
offer new resources for businesses and consisted of three elements: (1) ‘Pages', a new
type of Facebook profile open to ‘businesses and organizations' allowing institutions to
‘interact and affiliate' with end-users; (2) ‘Social Ads', ad technology to target specific
demographics and distribute ads via the ‘social graph', further connecting advertisers to
businesses and end-users; and (3) ‘Facebook Insights', an analytics product related to
Pages and Social Ads (FBN2007b). Importantly, Pages significantly elevated the posi-
tion of businesses, which previously had no official presence on the platform, whereas
the new ad and analytics products marked a novel way for businesses and advertisers to
target users on the platform via the social graph. The launch of FDP, together with the
introduction of new sets of ‘products' and associated boundary resources aimed at busi-
nesses, formalized Facebook as a multisided platform by facilitating interactions among
end-users (consumers), businesses (e.g. content developers, small and medium-sized
businesses), third-party content developers (e.g. game developers), advertisers, and
others.

In these formative years, spanning 2006-2009, Facebook also invested in its plat-
formization efforts by extending platform functionalities outwards. For example, 2008
marked the launch of ‘Facebook Connect', a social login feature for third-party websites.
This was followed by the rollout of the ‘Open Graph' protocol in 2010, a mechanism for
turning external web pages into objects that can be incorporated into the social graph, as
well as including a set of social plugins — including the Like button — for integrating
Facebook functionality into third-party websites (Bodle, 2011).

The successful, widespread technical expansion of the platform both inwards and
outwards, together with the attraction of new sides to the platform, culminated in
Facebook's IPO in May 2012. The question then emerges, how did the platform evolve
when expanding into the mobile ecosystem?

From web to app instances: building a mobile messaging
infrastructure

Despite the mass diffusion of mobile media and somewhat surprisingly given Facebook's
current dominance in the app economy, the company initially ‘moved reluctantly' to
offer dedicated apps for mobile devices (Goggin, 2014: 1071). The company's first app
for Apple i0S became available in July 2008 and offered a limited set of functionalities
compared to the Facebook website (FBM2008). However, Facebook's reluctance dissi-
pated quickly when in late 2012 Zuckerberg singled out three strategic ‘core areas':
‘mobile, platform, and monetization' (FBE2012). Later, in a moment of reflection,
Zuckerberg observed, ‘If 2012 was the year we turned our core product into a mobile
Nieborg and Helmond 207

product, then 2013 was the year when we turned our business into a mobile business'
(FBE2013). Speaking to the company's ability to wield financial capital (through acqui-
sitions) and to harness same-side network effects, Facebook's main revenue stream,
advertising, moved from its web instances to its app instances in a matter of months.

To differentiate between Facebook's web presence and its burgeoning app collection,
we reiterate our conceptualization of Facebook as a data infrastructure that hosts multi-
ple platform instances. During its transformation into a ‘mobile business', Messenger
became the first platform instance to be launched after the Facebook app.5 Messaging
functionality had been present for years on Facebook's web instance, Facebook.com,
where it was first branded as ‘Facebook Chat' (2008) and later morphed into “Facebook
Messages' (2010). Initially, the Facebook app mimicked the ‘Facebook Chat' functional-
ity of Facebook's web instance (FBM2008), but in late 2011 the company decided to
unbundle the messaging portion by launching Messenger as a separate app instance,
positioning it as ‘an extension of Facebook Messages' (FBM2011).

Ultimately, the unbundling of Messenger is exemplary of Facebook's efforts to posi-
tion itself as a central data-intermediary in the mobile ecosystem, or, to become the
default connective layer — or mobile infrastructure — on top of mobile operating systems,
thereby supplanting ‘generative' technologies (Zittrain, 2009), such as making calls and
texting. Over the course of several years, Zuckerberg fleshed out a three-step process, or
‘formula' (FBE2015b), that tied together his three areas of ‘mobile, platform, and mon-
etization'. Step | is to build ‘ubiquitous utilities', such as messaging, ‘that | billion or 2
billion or more people are going to want to use' (FBE2016a). Once at scale, because of
Facebook's unique position to leverage network effects, these ‘utilities' (i.e. apps) then
evolve into multisided markets or ‘full ecosystems with developers and businesses'
(FBE2016b), which then enables ‘people to organically interact with businesses'
(FBE2016c). The third and final step is to roll out ‘monetization' and to ‘really start dial-
ing up advertising' (FBE2015b). Not only does this strategy reaffirm Facebook's infra-
structural aspirations, it also demonstrates the interaction between Facebook's economic
and technological dimensions in the mobile ecosystem.

Next, we will retrace Messenger's evolution and argue that the app's development
follows a trajectory similar to the 2007 rollout of the FDP.

The messenger platform: the evolution from apps into
nested platforms

Shortly after Messenger reached over half a billion users in 2014 (FBE2014), the com-
pany shifted its focus toward expanding the app both inwards and outwards, and growing
the app's business sides. By launching the Messenger Platform at its F8 Developer
Conference in early 2015, Facebook opened Messenger to external developers —
establishing its technical dimension — and a select group of ‘commercial partners', tak-
ing initial steps to set up a multisided market (FBM2015a).

The launch ushered in the platformization of the app ecosystem, thereby adding an
additional layer of analytical complexity to studying the platform's evolution as it dem-
onstrates how an app instance can simultaneously become a technological platform and
208 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

outwards extension

@ Message Us

third party apps

outwards extension

outwards extension
@ Message Us

v Send to @ Messenger Q OQ Q
o We Ze

stand-alone nested apps (discont'd)

third party sites

messenger.com
bots extensions games

facebook.com Messenger
(platform instance)

web / mobile web iOS / Android

Messenger Platform
cebook data infrastructur

Figure |. The expansion of Messenger Platform. Graphic by Fernando van der Vlist.

operate a multisided market. This blurring of the separation between, on one hand, plat-
forms and, on the other hand, apps built on top of platforms is noted in recent work on
software ecosystems and information systems. For example, Messerschmitt and
Szyperski (2005) observe how app instances can evolve ‘into infrastructural platforms
for other applications' (p. 200), which Tiwana (2014) conceptualizes as ‘nested plat-
forms' or a platform within a platform (p. 264). We argue that with the introduction of
Messenger Platform, the app evolved into a prototypical nested platform by establishing
business partnerships and an ecosystem of third-party apps and other software services
built both on top of and within Messenger. In Figure 1, we visualize how Messenger
expanded its boundaries inwards, through third-party bots, bot extensions and games,
Nieborg and Helmond 209

and outwards by allowing third-party app developers to develop standalone apps for
Messenger and ‘Messenger plugins' for external (mobile) websites and apps.°

The first version of Messenger Platform mainly developed the technical dimension of
the platform. Together with the launch of Messenger Platform, a wealth of technical
boundary resources became available, such as SDKs for iOS and Android and associated
technical documentation ‘to integrate your app with Messenger' (FBM2015a; FBM2015b).
These resources enhanced the programmability of the platform and facilitated the out-
wards extension of Messenger into other apps. An example of how third-party developers
seized the opportunity to integrate their services with Messenger was the introduction of
a somewhat uncommon app genre which we, extending Tiwana's terminology, conceptu-
alize as standalone nested apps. The standalone qualifier derives from the necessity to
install these ‘Apps for Messenger' separate from Messenger via the Google or Apple app
stores, similar to any other app. Yet, they are nested because their sole functionality is to
share content within the boundaries of Messenger. This app genre was called ‘Expression
Apps' by Facebook, carrying a small blue Messenger logo in their app icons and were
meant for end-users to ‘express themselves and get creative' by creating and sharing con-
tent like images, animated gifs, and videos (FBM2015b; FBM2015c).

While no specific boundary resources were made available to businesses, Facebook
did anticipate expanding Messenger's business dimension by promoting use case sce-
narios, forthcoming functions, and a sign-up form for interested companies on the
Messenger website (FBM2015d). This first announcement can be seen as the initiation
of the second step in Zuckerberg's ‘formula', focused on attracting businesses to estab-
lish a presence in the app. As Zuckerberg told analysts and investors early 2016, and
before moving on to ‘monetize' end-users, he considered it essential for end-users to
have ‘organic interactions' with businesses and to have ‘that feel good and be a good part
of the experience with good content' (FBE2015b). Therefore, at the 2016 Facebook F8
Developer Conference, the company announced another major iteration of Messenger
Platform, which marked the official introduction of the platform's business dimension as
well as the further development of its technical dimension as reflected in its new tagline:
a platform designed for businesses and developers' (FBM2016a). Similar to the launch
of FDP, which addressed the lack of business ‘Profiles' on Facebook's web instances,
Messenger Platform now allowed every business to have a visible profile within the app.
It gave institutions, but above all companies, a more prominent, structural presence in the
app thereby morphing into a multisided nested platform connecting end-users, content
developers, and businesses.

Following the F8 conference, the technical dimension of the platform changed signifi-
cantly with Messenger's move toward inwards expansion by adding bots (FBM201 6a;
FBM2016b). These extensions are different from standalone nested apps as they only
function within Messenger. Bots were primarily positioned to facilitate ‘deeper interac-
tions' (FBM2016b) among businesses and end-users and to allow for ‘more personal,
more proactive, and more streamlined' conversations through chat automation
(FBM2016c). Signaling Messenger Platform's outwards extension, a number of ‘discov-
ery tools' were introduced to find different kinds of users (both end-users and busi-
nesses), such as ‘Messenger Codes', usernames and links, as well as a novel set of
“Message Us' and ‘Send to Messenger' plugins for third-party (mobile) websites. These

210 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

examples of outwards expansion serve as clear examples of the platformization of the
app ecosystem. They are also indicative of Facebook's rapid iteration cycles and the
expedited evolution of its platform instances. For example, while expanding the app's
technological and business dimension, the standalone nested apps were unofficially dis-
continued by quietly removing their documentation from the main Messenger Platform
resources and later by disabling their technical functionalities altogether. Such unan-
nounced shifts in technical implementations and economic strategies demonstrate
Messenger's intraoperability: asymmetrical power relations between the platform and its
third-party developers, leaving developers who have invested in the app with broken
apps and broken businesses.

Over the course of 2016 and 2017, Facebook experimented heavily with connecting
new sides and new ‘monetization options', thereby growing the app's business dimension.
For example, it offered businesses tools to get information and analytics on its bot users,
and to find and match their existing customers on Messenger (FBM2016d; FBM2018a).
At the end of 2016, Facebook reconnected with game developers by introducing ‘Instant
Games for Messenger' (FBM2016e) in an effort to lure end-users away from competing
game apps and add a potentially lucrative business side (Nieborg, 2015). After this intro-
duction, the company started testing game monetization with in-app purchases and in-
game ads (FBM2017e). Mid-2017 the company further professionalized its business
dimension by launching a new set of resources to help businesses ‘find providers that
specialize in building experiences on Messenger'? (FBM2017h). These ‘Platform
Development Providers' have specific certified expertise to help businesses implement
Messenger. As such, this group of official partners are crucial in building extensions and
integrations and thus facilitate and expedite the process of platformization (Helmond
et al., 2017). Finally, late 2017 Messenger further expanded outwards with the introduc-
tion of the ‘Customer Chat Plugin', enabling select businesses to integrate Messenger chat
and bots into their websites (FBM2017g). At this point, Messenger featured ‘more than 20
million businesses' that were ‘communicating with customers' through the app (FBE2017),
signaling Facebook's ability to enforce intraoperability among millions of users.

Taken together, these sustained efforts to add business sides to Messenger, combined
with its technical expansion both inwards and outwards, paved the way for the third and
final step in Zuckerberg's ‘formula': the monetization of Messenger's 1.3 billion monthly
active users. To this end, in the summer of 2017 ‘Messenger Ads' were introduced, ini-
tially shown to select users in the app's home tab (FBM2017a; FBM2017b), followed by
the introduction of ‘Sponsored Messages' later that year (FBM2017i).

At this point in its evolution, we consider Messenger to be in a crucial phase of app
ambiguity (cf. Van Dijck, 2013). That is to say, Facebook is heavily experimenting with
adding additional sides, exploring bot functionality and machine learning technology
with its intelligent assistant M to further automate and translate conversations, aug-
mented reality, and a variety of monetization strategies (FBM2018b). For example, late
2017 the company started experimenting with SDKs for payments and an in-app ‘Buy
Button' (FBM2017c), laying the foundation for a more expansive payment infrastructure
(FBM2017d). Exactly because Messenger's rapid diffusion, Facebook's infrastructural
aspirations for the mobile ecosystem and its attempts to further encapsulate generative
digital practices, such as messaging and paying, deserve sustained critical attention.
Nieborg and Helmond 211

Conclusion

“Who is your biggest competitor?', US Senator Lindsey Graham asked Mark Zuckerberg
during the April 2018 hearings in the US Congress. In his answer, Zuckerberg pointed
to other members of the Big Five tech platforms — Google, Apple, Amazon, and
Microsoft — which, he said, offer ‘overlapping services'. The irony of pointing toward
companies that are also considered to dominate their respective markets notwithstand-
ing, Zuckerberg's answer was disingenuous at best. From a purely economic perspec-
tive, direct network effects raise the ‘switching costs' for end-users, thereby decreasing
the ability to join a competing social media platform (Haucap and Heimeshoff, 2014).
That is, if there are any viable competitors to Facebook. In a number of countries, par-
ticularly those rolling out Facebook's Internet.org Free Basics platform, such as the
Philippines, Nigeria, and previously Myanmar, Facebook has become synonymous with
‘the Internet' (Vaidhyanathan, 2018).

Senator Graham's question, however relevant, points to the limits of a purely eco-
nomic perspective on platform power. Opting out of Facebook comes at a very high
cost and is nearly impossible. Deleting one's Facebook account does not delete all data
that have been shared with third-parties since the launch of the FDP in 2007. Nor does
it prevent the company from tracking users (and non-Facebook users) across the web
and app ecosystems. All this is to say, Zuckerberg's testimony, once again (Hoffmann
et al., 2018), willfully ignores a decade-long effort to position Facebook as the core
“social infrastructure' of the web and mobile ecosystems. By combining and co-opting
notions such as ‘social' and ‘infrastructure', Zuckerberg aims to appropriate the his-
torical connotations of utilities and infrastructure as non-commercial services for the
common good, thereby normalizing the commodification of connectivity and user
data.

Looking forward, we argue that our analytical framework can be helpful to criti-
cally engage with Facebook's ambitions beyond the app ecosystem that include invest-
ments in global Internet infrastructure and connectivity. Facebook's past and current
investments concern three levels: (1) internal growth through an increasing number of
platform-owned and operated app and web instances; (2) through acquisitions of exist-
ing apps such as Instagram (2012) and WhatsApp (2014); and (3) external growth
through the platformization of the web and app space. While political economists have
traditionally focused on the first two levels, it is through the analysis of how platforms
attract business sides, leverage direct and indirect network effects, afford programma-
bility, and offer boundary resources, that platforms operationalize their infrastructural
agendas.

Our framework, then, allows for a critical inquiry into the dynamics of platform evo-
lution as it considers a platform's technical and economic dimensions in tandem. As
such, we attempt to bridge the gap between economic disciplines and scholarship on
platform boundaries and by doing so offering a new conceptual vocabulary to scholars in
the area of platform studies. Our mixed-method approach suggests to move away from
analyzing platforms as either (web)sites or (individual) apps and instead to consider
platforms as data infrastructures that own and operate a variety of platform instances that
each perform particular data work. Ultimately, the Messenger Platform is an instructive
212 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

example of how platform companies, such as Facebook, are able to enforce data intraop-
erability. For example, recent case studies on the relationship between Facebook and
news organizations point toward increased platform dependency, organizational homog-
enization, and deep power asymmetries (Caplan and boyd, 2018; Nechushtai, 2018;
Nieborg and Poell, 2018).

The Big Five technology companies, Vaidhyanathan (2018) argues, ‘share one long-
term vision: to be the operating system of our lives' (p. 99). Therefore, we encourage
contributions to platform and app studies research exploring the concentration of plat-
form power and the impact of platformization on all the actors in the app ecosystem, by
analyzing either other apps in Facebook's family or other platforms such as LINE,
Twitter, or ‘super app' WeChat. Our analysis of Messenger demonstrates that this is a
crucial moment in Facebook's evolution as it enters new markets, tests new technologies,
and explores new business models in the mobile ecosystem. Exactly because of the
global infrastructural ambitions of dominant platform companies, Facebook above all,
the time for critical, policy and discursive intervention is now.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful for the support of Dr Ira Wells and a fantastic group of Research Assistants:
Aparajita Bhandari, Mark Khalil, Amrita Maharaj, Anna Bianca Roach, and Saarah Sheikh.

Funding

This research received financial support from the 2017 Scholars-in-Residence program funded by
the Jackman Humanities Institute at the University of Toronto. This work is part of the research
programme Innovational Research Incentives Scheme Veni with project number 275-45-009,
which is (partly) financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).

Notes

1. For the purpose of readability and clarity, we use a coding structure when referencing our
corpus material (see Table 1 and Appendix 1).

2. As of May 2018, Facebook has 72 macOS, Amazon, iOS, and Android apps in total, tailored
to end-users, (e.g. Facebook Messenger), developers (e.g. F8), businesses (Facebook Pages
Manager), content creators (Facebook Creator), and advertisers (Facebook Ads Manager)
(APP2018b).

3. We employ the term end-users to refer to individuals using websites and apps. Apart from
end-users, other ‘sides' in a market are those institutional actors that are economically and
technically integrated with a platform. ‘Partners' are institutional actors that have formalized
platform relationships which may be equally dependent on a platform, but who are not neces-
sarily technically integrated.

4. Facebook Development Program's official launch was preceded by a ‘beta' version in August
2006 (FBP2006a). Its rollout — starting with a beta launch to be followed by ‘official' (re)
launches — is typical of Facebook's approach to major infrastructural initiatives, thereby chal-
lenging neat periodization.

5. In this article, we focus on Facebook Messenger for iOS and Android only. Facebook has also
launched a Messenger ‘Lite' and ‘Kids' version.

6. Messenger is not the first to do so, as WeChat (Tencent Holdings) is one of the most promi-
nent examples of a nested platform that affords app integrations.
Nieborg and Helmond 213

ORCID iDs

David B Nieborg ® https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3498-789X
Anne Helmond ip) https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4327-4012

References

Alaimo C and Kallinikos J (2017) Computing the everyday: social media as data platforms. The
Information Society 33(4): 175-191.

Apperley T and Parikka J (2018) Platform studies' epistemic threshold. Games and Culture 13(4):
349-369.

Bechmann A (2013) Internet profiling: the economy of data intraoperability on Facebook and
Google. Mediekultur: Journal of Media and Communication Research 29(55): 72-91.

Bodle R (2011) Regimes of sharing. Information, Communication & Society 14(3): 320-337.

Bogost I and Montfort N (2009) Platform studies: frequently questioned answers. In: Proceedings
of the digital arts and culture conference. Irvine, CA: University of California. Available at:
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/0110k9br.pdf (accessed 2 September 2017).

Bowker GC and Star SL (1999) Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Briigger N (2015) A brief history of Facebook as a media text: the development of an empty
structure. First Monday, 20. Available at: https://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/5423

Bucher T (2012) Want to be on the top? Algorithmic power and the threat of invisibility on
Facebook. New Media & Society 14(7): 1164-1180.

Caers R, Feyter TD, Couck MD, et al. (2013) Facebook: a literature review. New Media & Society
15(6): 982-1002.

Caplan R and boyd d (2018) Isomorphism through algorithms: institutional dependencies in the
case of Facebook. Big Data & Society 5(1): 1-12.

De Reuver M, Sorensen C and Basole RC (2018) The digital platform: a research agenda. Journal
of Information Technology 33(2): 124-135.

Eaton B, Elaluf -Calderwood S, Sorensen C, et al. (2015) Distributed tuning of boundary resources:
the case of Apple's iOS service system. MIS Quarterly 39(1): 217-243.

Elmer G (2017) Precorporation: or what financialisation can tell us about the histories of the
Internet. Internet Histories 1(1—2): 90-96.

Fisher E (2015) ‘You media': audiencing as marketing in social media. Media, Culture & Society
37(1): 50-67.

Gawer A (2014) Bridging differing perspectives on technological platforms: toward an integrative
framework. Research Policy 43(7): 1239-1249.

Gerlitz C and Helmond A (2013) The Like economy: social buttons and the data-intensive web.
New Media & Society 15(8): 1348-1365.

Ghazawneh A and Henfridsson O (2013) Balancing platform control and external contribution in
third-party development: the boundary resources model. Information Systems Journal 23(2):
173-192.

Gillespie T (2010) The politics of ‘platforms'. New Media & Society 12(3): 347-364.

Goggin G (2014) Facebook's mobile career. New Media & Society 16(7): 1068-1086.

Gray J, Bounegru L, Milan S, et al. (2016) Ways of seeing data: toward a critical literacy for
data visualizations as research objects and research devices In: Kubitschko S and Kaun A
(eds) Innovative Methods in Media and Communication Research. New York: Springer
International Publishing, pp. 227-251.
214 Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

Haucap J and Heimeshoff U (2014) Google, Facebook, Amazon, eBay: is the Internet driving com-
petition or market monopolization? /nternational Economics and Economic Policy 11(1-2):
49-61.

Helmond A (2015) The platformization of the web: making web data platform ready. Social Media
+ Society 1(2): 1-11.

Helmond A, Nieborg DB and van der Vlist FN (2017) The political economy of social data: a
historical analysis of platform-industry partnerships. Jn: Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on social media & society, Toronto, ON, Canada, 28-30 July, pp. 38:1—-38:5. New
York: ACM.

Hoffmann AL, Proferes N and Zimmer M (2018) ‘Making the world more open and connected':
Mark Zuckerberg and the discursive construction of Facebook and its users. New Media &
Society 20(1): 199-218.

Langlois G and Elmer G (2013) The research politics of social media platforms. Culture Machine
14: 1-17.

McIntyre DP and Srinivasan A (2017) Networks, platforms, and strategy: emerging views and next
steps. Strategic Management Journal 38(1): 141-160.

Messerschmitt DG and Szyperski C (2005) Software Ecosystem: Understanding an Indispensable

Technology and Industry. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Mosco V (2009) The Political Economy of Communication, 2nd edn. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.

Mosco V (2017) Becoming Digital: Toward a Post-Internet Society. Bingley: Emerald Publishing.

Nechushtai E (2018). Could digital platforms capture the media through infrastructure? Journalism

19(8): 1043-1058.

Nieborg DB (2015) Crushing candy: the free-to-play game in its connective commodity form.

Social Media + Society 1(2): 1-12.

Nieborg DB (2016) Free-to-play games and app advertising: the rise of the player commodity. In:

Hamilton JF, Bodle R and Korin E (eds) Explorations in Critical Studies of Advertising. New

York: Routledge, pp. 28-41.

Nieborg DB and Poell T (2018) The platformization of cultural production: theorizing the contin-

gent cultural commodity. New Media & Society 20(11): 4275-4292.

Plantin J-C, Lagoze C, Edwards PN, et al. (2018) Infrastructure studies meet platform studies in

the age of Google and Facebook. New Media & Society 20(1): 293-310.

Rochet J-C and Tirole J (2003) Platform competition in two-sided markets. Journal of the European
Economic Association 1(4): 990-1029.

Srnicek N (2016) Platform Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Stoycheff E, Liu J, Wibowo KA, et al. (2017) What have we learned about social media by study-
ing Facebook? A decade in review. New Media & Society 19(6): 968-980.

Tiwana A (2014) Platform Ecosystems: Aligning Architecture, Governance, and Strategy.
Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann.

Vaidhyanathan S (2018) Antisocial Media: How Facebook Disconnects Us and Undermines
Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Van Dijck J (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Wilson RE, Gosling SD and Graham LT (2012) A review of Facebook research in the social sci-
ences. Perspectives on Psychological Science 7(3): 203-220.

Zittrain J (2009) The Future of the Internet-And How to Stop It. New Haven, CT: Yale University

Press.

215

Nieborg and Helmond

Jeol403siy, O€ 1ZE06BETT=IS0d;dyd-Bojq/Wi0> yooGa2" 30}q
‘seBuassaly 800z Ainfol IF ABU /Pr6rE 190608007/92M/240 aAlyaeqamy/:sda34 BUOY! JO} YOOGaIe4 s00¢Wad
[eo1403siy /Spe-yooqanej-s|laaun
‘ssauisng g4 L007 42qQWaAON 9 O0qe284/| | /Z007/SMEU/WO> gy WOOJ4sMau//:sdy1Y4 SPY JOoqgarey sleAup) YOoqare4 qZ007N@4
jsuoneoydde
Jed1403S1Y4 [21ID0s-Jo-suadojaaap-4oj-wopejd-sjaaun suoneoiddy jeinos yo
“‘wuopeld g4 L007 AeW bZ 100q22%4/S0/Z007/SMeU/WO> qWOoOIsmau//:sdi3zy —- sdadojaaaq 4O} WO;IeIq S[]eAUT, JOOgGare4 eZ007NG4
Jeol403siy, dyd-uolesyioeds /wior yooqaey'siadojanep uonesyioads
“w4opeld a4 800z AeW €1 I-44 /P08b 1 ZE | S08007/92M/240aAlyae'qamy/:sda34 [PA27-UBIH Wopeld s1adojaasq yooqe>e4 PLO0@dd4
17=A1019°9 | =Zojqzdyd
Jeo1403s14 “sMaU/LUOD YOOGarky'ssadojarap
“w4opeld a4 L002 RW LZ //-4384/1 7070090 202007/92M/240@Alyae-qamy/:sda34 SEYPUNE] WOPe}q YOoqe2e4 2L00@da4
[eo1403S14 wor }00qa9z'suadojaaap
“W4opeld a4 2007 eunf ¢| IFAUY/67SEEOE | 90Z007/92M/8.40'9A1YyDe'Gamy/:sca3y suadojaraq »Jo0qa0e4 9L00%dd4
Jeo1403s14 dyd-uonequawinsop /tu0> yoogazRy'ssadojanap
“w4opeld a4 2007 eunf €1 //-4384/8 | THEOE | 90L007/92M/2402Aly>4e-qamy/:sda34 yonruswinsoq suedojaaeq yooqe>e4 ®L00@da4
[eo1403S14 wor }00qa9z'suadojaaap
“W4opeld a4 9007 3snBnvy Oz /F-334/209 | € 107809007/42M/8.40'9AlyDe'Gamy/:sca3y (r10q) waopre|g uatudojarsgq yooqe>e4 e9007%da4
IVE990BTETHHSHS 10 | /AtjuNUWOD-[eqo|8-BuIpIINg
a L10% Asenaqey 9] /8.49q49>42NZ-y.12WU/saIOU/WIOI" YOO gaze} MMM//:Sd77y Auunwwo> jeqo[5 surpying P1074
1%£0000000007000 | /Auedwio>
sonsiaeig ddy 810% YEW 8 Juoa‘aiuuedde-mmmy/:sdaay sddy paysiqng »jooqaze4 9810%ddV
Jenrredso.nei-7 | Q7-a}uue-dde Awou0sz ddy ayp 40}
sonsneig ddy 8107 Avenuef 7} /exep-1a>14eW/SIYBIsUI/Ua/LUODalUUedde-MMmM//:sd334 Jka, jequawunuopy  :aaiedso.nay / 107 PB 10TddV
/eaazedso.30J-9 | QZ-a!1uue-dde winjuawop) penunuo}
sonsieig ddy Lioz Menuef 7} /eyep-3e>4eW/S2Y3!sul/Ua/LWO>"a1uUedde-Mmmy/:sd33Yy S,2[IQOW — eANredsoney 9107 aU ddy L\0%ddV
jeannedso.ed suafuosy MAN suedQ UONeZNeUOLY
sonsneig ddy 9107 Avenuef 9z -§ 1 07-a!uue-dde/wosajuuedde8o}q//:d334 — aandadso.noy ¢ 107 aluuy ddy 910%ddV
/v107-2anzedso.8.4-xepul-ajuue-dde 4107 Jo spuasy ddy doy ayy
sonsieig ddy $107 Avenuef gz /eyep-3e>4eW/S2Y3!sul/Ua/LWO>"a1uUedde-Mmmy/:sd33Yy — eanredso.ney $107 :xepuy aluuy ddy $10%ddV
/€107-ea1pedso.net
-xepul ue-ddeswios‘aiuuedde80)q €107 JO spuesy doy ayy
eg ddy bloc Ainfg = //'daU/HEZEL180Z0b 107/F2M/2.10°2AIyD1e-Gamy/:schay — eaedso.ney €107 :xepul auuy ddy v10%dd¥
asodung aaep (VI) Tn pL apo>

| xipuaddy
Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

216

(panunuo>)

wuopeld ssaulsng-0}-1a8uassow
JaBuassapl L107 4990290 | /si2npo.d/ssauisng/Wos}oogazey MMM//:sdI.4 ssaulsng 40} JaBuassap,y Yooqere4 QZI0@Was
wyopeld J2qo|8-Bul08-aue-spe-sesuassaw
JeBuassal| L10c Aint vt /SMAU/SSAUISNG/LUOD"OO qa2ey MMM//:Sd]34 [eqo|8 Sulo8 aie szieape JaBuassapy e/10CWa4
WAOPeld /239q-Paso|s-sawues-suersul/O€/| |/910Z/9SOd
JaBuassapl 9107 Jequiaron OF [30\q/W0>yooga2x's.iedojaaap//:sdaay sates) JueIsU] 291 07W94
sarumsoddg
Wwuopeld /uesZ0.1d-11e3SqQy-pue-sanA|eue-Bulppe-sasuassow s4aqwua| 1eISg4 pue oddng
JaBuassapl 9107 4equaron +] -40}-S}0q/80}q/WO> yooqarey'sanAjeue//:sdaay sondeuy Suippy :4eBuassapl 10} si0g P9107WS4
wuopeid /4@8uasseu-410§-S104/Z | /40/9 107/2S0d
JeBuassal| 9107 dy ZI /B0|q/wWo2yoogacxy ssadojaaap//:sdaay JaBuassal| JO} s10g pling 0] MOH, 291 0@Wa4
wuopeld /9)-3e-waoped
JaBuassapl 9107 Wdy 71 -saBuassetu/p0/9 | OZ/SMauU/LUO> gy WO OusMau//:sd34 gd 2e Wiopeg seBuassapy q910@Wa4
Jea1403s14 juior'qy
“WOpeld “wope|dieBuassa//:sd334// 78 E77 109 | 0Z/IOM
JaBuassapl 9107 Wdy 71 /840°@A1yrse-gamy/:sdyay Wuoped Je8uassap) P91 07WS4
Jea1403s14 ssauisng
‘ssauisng /Wo> JaBuassew//:sd334/0 | $S900E£0S 1 07/42
Jasuassap| S10Z Y4eW OF /340°9A1yd4e'gam//:sda1y Ja8uassap,) UO sassauisng PSIO@WS4
Jeol403siy, wuopejd
“Wop /uior seBuassau//:sdray/Z7EBZEO | CEOS | OT/IOM
Ja8uassal| 10% Y4RW IE /340°9A1yd4e'gam//:sda1y Wuoped Ja3uassapy 2S107W94
Jeol403siy, 4aBuassaul/ssop/Wwo0s
“WOpeld ‘Jooqarey's4adojeaap//:sd334/00 | 0061 0S | 07/424 Wuopeld
Ja8uassal| $107 lady 61 /340°9A1yd4e'gam//:sda1y JaBuassa|| ‘sx0q ‘siadojaaaq yooqa2e4 qS10@W94
jeal403siy, /498uassaw-UO-sassaulsng-pue
“wuopeld -wuopejd-se8uassaw-3ulnpo.3ul/§Z/£0/¢ 107/3s0d JeBuassap, UO sasseuisng
JeBuassal| S107 YEW ST /B0|q/wWo2yoogacxy ssadojaaap//:sdaay pue wuopeg Ja8uassap,y Sulsnpo.nuy eg10tWad
[ea1Joasiy 1€ 1 ZPSEPS6HZ0S 10 /A!Gow-Uo-aBessaw-o1-Kem
‘aeBuassapy 1107 3sn8ny 6 -4O1SR}-B/}00Ga2e}/SeIOU/LUOD" OO Garey MMM//:SdI4 D[IGOP UO a8essapj 03 AeA JoIsey 110@Wad
asodung arp (VI) WN api apop

(pen

uoD) *| xipueddy
217

Nieborg and Helmond

idiadsueuy-|je>-s8uiuses

segepdn -S1|NS2.1-p | QZ-pb-UO-B49q19>9NZ->4eW-099-qy adjuosues |
ssoulsng $10@ Avenue gz ~S]00422}-9960987Z/2|>4e/WO> eYd]eBupjaas//:sca3y PD sBulusey $107 pO YOOqereY +10¢I94
adiosuesa
segepdn -|]82-sBuusea-s3nso-¢ | QZ-pb-sassn>sip-o8> adjuosues |
ssoulsng y10% Avenuef 6Z ~S00422%}- | 9/86 | /2|>34e/WO> eYdjeBupjaas//:sda3y ID sBuwsez E107 FO YOOqareJ €10¢4a4
adiosuesa
segepdn [e2-s8ulusea-s3jnsei-s8ulusea-7 | Q7-¢b-sassnosip-o82 adiosues
ssoulsng T10Z 4999390 EZ ~SJ004222}- | SZhhG /2|> He /WOD eYdeBupjaas//:sda3y ID sBuswsey 710% ED YOoqa2eJ T10@da4
/4@8uasseW-Ul-suod9UU0d JaBuassal|
wuopeld -uedaep-01-2|doad-pue-sassauisng-0}-sjooa-mau ul suonzeuu0> uadeag 02 ajdoag pue
JeBuassopy 8107 AeW I “81 07-81/S0/8 | OZ/SMAU/tUO> gy LO OAsMauy/:sd334 Sassaulsng JO} sjOOl MEN :8107 84 9810@Wa4
wopeld BojaBueys/wsoped
JaBuassapl S061 Ainfol -Ja3uassau/sdop/Wio>ooqarxy'ssadojanep//:sdaay, BojaBueyD wiope|g seBuassapy egloz7Wwad
/4e8uassaw-uo JaBuassop|
wopeld -9AlUU)-S4adojaAap-pue-sassaulsng-djay-o2-3ulyoune} uo aAluy| suadojaaaq pure sassauisng
Ja8uassal| L107 2unf 6Z -S8D.1NOSO1-M9U /LUOO.1SMAU/WOD"qy Jasuassau//:sdiay dja} 02 Sulysuneq sedinosay MAN, UZLIO@W94
WA4opeld 4@Buassaw-uo-ssaulsng-noA-MO13-03-ShEM JeBuassep)
daBuassapl LIOZ 49QUIBAON € -BUOLU/SMAU/SSEUISNG/LUOD" YOO gaze} MMM//:Sd774 uo ssauisng 4no , MO45) 02 Ske AA 240; Z10@WE4
wuopeld pyqyes | e2e-desei-7-7-wuoped
Ja8uassal| LIOZ A2QUIAAON Z| -4e8uassalu/wos'siadojaaa piasuassaw's0]q//:sda3y, desay 77 Wuopey JaBuassapy 3Z107W94
/MAlAaI-Ul-1294-7 | OZ,
da8uassapl L107 42quier9q €] -sua8uassaw/Z | // | (7/SMeU/WO> gy Wo os1sMau//:sda3y DY Ul VA) /10Z S.AeBuassapy IZIOTWS4
/4@Buassow
wuopeld -UO-SaLUeB-IURISUI-0}-BUILUOI-ssadojarap-4O} J@Buassap,] UO sawed IUeISU|
daBuassapl L10Z 4990290 61 -UONPZN9UOW/WWOOUSMAU/WOD"qy Jasuassetu//:sdI.y 02 BulwioD suadojaraq 10} uonezneuoP) ®Z10TWE4
wopeld ssa22esenbau” syuawAed
Ja8uassal| L10Z 4990290 | /usojrej|d~se8uassaw/wos yooqazRy MMM//:Sd714 wreuZo.id vag sno 40} A\ddy PZIO@WS4
WA4opeld Ang/suonng/sesesseaw-puas/wuoped
JeBuassal| L107 4999290 | -JaBuassa/s2Op/WOd Ooga2Ry'siadojaaap//:sdaay (Wag) vowing Ang 2210@W94
asodung aaep (vi) Wn ap apoD

(panunuod) *| xipuaddy
Media, Culture & Society 41 (2)

218

3Pd'p9agy9PE829Z

seaepdn ~6P66-69Zb->P |>-€39P9TB?/1 089ZE1000-ID
ssouisng 8107 Auensqe4 I /)9uqUO.ypNo}>‘pg4mugzdguig I pyysdaay woday yenuuy /|07 #OOqGe5e4 8107494
gpd
seaepdn ‘Adjsosuesr-jjeo-sBulusez-/ | -EO/EO/Z | OT/sie!ueuy. dysosues
ssoulsng L107 4equierony | ~20P/S214/8£08966E/WO> Up>pb" | 7s//:sd3y ED sBulusey £107 EO YOOqere4 210744
sagepdn jpdradisosues J -sBurusez-9 | €O-G4/EO/9 |OT/s|eioueuy adiosuesy
ssaulsng 9107 4OqUISACN Z ~DOP/S914/8EZ08966E/WIO> UPrpb | 78//:8d334 leD sBuusez 910% ED YOOqareY 2910734
seaepdn gpdadisosuea -s8urusez-9 | 7O-g4/7b/9 | OZ/s|eloueUY adiosues
sseulsng 9107 Ainf £7 ~20P/SP|4/8EZ08966E/WO> Uprpb* | Zs//:sd334 IleD sBuwseZ 9107 7D Aooqare4 99107494
adussues-1]29
seaepdn -sBulusea-s3jnsei-9 | 0Z- | b-B4aqserj2nZ-101)}9-4eW-qy adiosues
ssoulsng 9107 Hdy LZ “00q222}-£8/896E /2[2!242/WOD"eyd|eBuLyjaas//:sdz3y ED sBuluseZ 9107 1D YOoqere4 9107484
adussues-1]29
seaepdn -sBulUsee-sinsei-¢ | Q7-pb-3.48q4a>2NZ-yseLU-089-q} adiosues
ssoulsng 910% Avenue ZZ -S00q22"}-97 60H BE /P[2!242/WWOD"eyd|eBuNyjaas//:sdzay ED sBuluseZ $107 FO YOOqere4 qs10zaad
adisosuey-|jeo-s8ulusea
sagepdn -SyNsa.l-¢ | QZ- | b-uo-8.49q19>/9NZ-301)}9-4eW-qy adisosues |
ssoulsng $107 Hdy 7 -00q222}-999760¢ /2[2!248/WWOD"eyd|eBuNyjaes//:sda3y RD sBuusezZ G10% 1D YOOqere4 eg 107484
asodung arp (VI) WN opi apop

(penunuos) *| xipueddy
